1.      In an economy, the sectors are classified into public and private on the
basis of

(a)   employment condition

(b)   nature of economic activities

(c)   ownership of enterprises

(d)   use of raw materials

2.      Economic liberalisation in India started with

(a)   substantial changes in industrial licensing policy

(b)   the convertibility of Indian rupee

(c)   doing away with procedural formalities for foreign direct investment

(d)   significant reduction in tax rates

3.      Which  of  the  following  areas  has  been  excluded,  by  the  
Ministry  of
Corporate  Affairs,  from  the  ambit  of  Corporate  Social  Responsibility
(CSR) activities"

(a)   livelihood enhancement and rural development projects.

(b)   contributions made ‘directly or indirectly’ to any political party.

(c)   promoting preventive health care and sanitation.

(d)   making  safe  drinking  water  available  would  be  considered  as  CSR
activities.

4.      Which  of  the  following  commissions  /  companies  of  Indian  origin
signed a pact for obtaining oil-blocks in Libya"

(a)   Reliance petroleum

(b)   Oil India Ltd.

(c)   ONGC

(d)   BPCL


5.      Which  company,  adopted  the  Taj  Mahal  through  the  ‘Clean  India
Campaign’ of tourism ministry"

(a)   Indian oil

(b)   BPCL

(c)   HPCL

(d)   ONGC

6.      Classification  of  an  enterprise  into  public  or  private  sector  
is  based
on                                              [CDS  2014 ,]

(a)   number of employees in the enterprise

(b)   ownership of assets of the enterprise

(c)   employment conditions for workers in the enterprise

(d)   nature of products manufactured by the enterprise

7.      According    to    the    Companies    Act,    2013,    ‘nominal    
capital’
implies                                                    [CDS  2014 ,]

(a)   such part of capital, which has been called for payment

(b)   the maximum amount of share capital of a company

(c)   such  part  of  capital,  which  has  been  received  by  a  company  
from  its
shareholders

(d)   such capital as the company issues from time to time for subscription

8.      Which one of the following is not a feature of the Nehru-Mahalanobis
model of development strategy"

[ND$/N$ SP 2016 ,]

(a)   Development of capital goods industries

(b)   Major involvement of the State in the economy

(c)   Industrial deregulation and disinvestment in the public sector

(d)   Enhancing the scope and importance of the public sector

9.      Consider the following statements—    [U*C 2016]

I.      Sick  Company  is  defined  as  one  whose  accumulated  losses  in  any
financial  year  are  equal  to  or  more  than  50%  of  its  average  net
worth during previous four financial years.

II.    The    Government    set-up    Board    of    Industrial    and    
Financial
Reconstruction  in  1987,  Which  of  the  statement  given  above
is/are correct"

Select the answer from the codes given below—

CodeV :

(a)   Only I


(b)   Only II

(c)   Both I and II

(d)   Neither I nor II

10.    During the episode of sustained fall in crude oil prices during the year
2015, which among the following best describes the pricing strategy of
the OPEC countries"

[U*C 2016]

(a)   Transfer pricing

(b)   Predatory pricing

(c)   Defensive pricing

(d)   Profit maximising prices

11.    A firm will be of optimum size when—  [U*C 2016]

(a)   Marginal cost is at a minimum

(b)   Average cost is at a minimum

(c)   Marginal cost is equal to marginal revenue

(d)   The firm maximises its output

12.    Which  of  the  following  is  India’s  first  Credit  Information  
Company
(CIC)"                                    [%2M P2 2016]

(a)   CRISIL Limited

(b)   CRIF High Mark CIC (P) Limited

(c)   Experian CIC of India (P) Limited

(d)   Trans Union CIBIL Limited

%usinHss/&orporatH GovHrnanFH/ THrms

13.    Consider the following statements in regard to Hedge funds:

(1)   Hedge funds are open to all types of investors.

(2)   Hedge  funds  are  immune  to  risk  of  the  market  and  always  produce
positive returns.

(3)   Investments in hedge funds are illiquid as they often require investors
keep their money in the fund for at least one year.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   1 only

(b)   1 and 2 only

(c)   2 and 3 only

(d)   3 only


14.    Consider the following statements in regard to ‘Inflation Index bonds’"

(1)   Investment  in  these  bonds  is  more  risky  as  these  bonds  increase 
 the
inflation risk attached to the investment.

(2)   It is better financial instrument compared to FD to hedge the risk rising
out of volatile economy.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

15.    Which of the following can be associated with ‘Gini Coefficient’"

(1)   National income inequality

(2)   Lorenz curve

(3)   Education system

Select the correct answer using the codes given below:

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   1 and 2 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

16.    Which of the following statement (s) is /are false"

1.     Wage Boards are tripartite in nature, with representatives from workers,
employers and independent members.

2.     Except for the wage Board for Journalists and Non - Jouralists, all the
other wage boards are statutory in nature

3.     Second National Commission on labour has recommended against the
utility of wages boards.

Select        the        correct        answer        using        the        
code        given
below:                                                                      
[CDS 2016 ,]

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   1 and 2 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

17.    Which of the following statements about India’s unorganised sector are
true"       [CDS  2014 ,]

1.     Labour is more in number than that in the organised sector.

2.     Job security and work regulation are better in unorganised sector.


3.     They are usually not organised into trade unions.

4.     Workers are usually employed for a limited number of days.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)   1, 2 and 4

(b)   1, 3 and 4

(c)   3 and 4

(d)   1 and 3

18.    As per the RBI guidelines, which one of the following is the minimum
tenure of Masala Bonds that an Indian Company can issue offshore"
[ND$/N$ SP 2016 ,,]

(a)   Five years

(b)   Four years

(c)   Three years

(d)   Two years

19.    The  financial  instrument,  through  which  Indian  companies  can  
raise
money     from     overseas     market     in     Rupees,     is     known     
as

—                                                         [U. PSC 2016]

(a)    RBI Bonds

(b)   Gold Bonds

(c)    Masala Bonds

(d)   Overseas Bonds

ForHign TraGH PoliFiHs

20.    The major aim of devaluation is to

(a)   Encourage exports

(b)   Encourage imports

(c)   Encourage both exports and imports

(d)   Discourage both exports and imports

21.    The   Team-9   initiative   is   a   techno   economic   cooperation   
venture
between India and eight countries of

(a)   West Africa

(b)   East Africa

(c)   North Africa

(d)   Central Africa

22.    Foreign currency which has a tendency of quick migration is called

(a)   Hot currency


(b)   Soft currency

(c)   Gold currency

(d)   Scarce currency

23.    The value of gold is determined in

(a)   London

(b)   Dubai

(c)   Rome

(d)   Teheran

24.    Consider the following actions which the government can take:

1.     Devaluing the domestic currency.

2.     Reduction in the export subsidy.

3.     Adopting  suitable  policies  which  attract  greater  FDI  and  more  
funds
from FIIs.

Which of the above action/actions can help in reducing the current account
deficit"

(a)   1 and 2

(b)   2 and 3

(c)   3 only

(d)   1 and 3

25.    Which one of the following statements with regard to India’s economy
between               1814               to               1860               is 
              not
correct"                                                                      
[CDS 2015 ,,]

(a)   Between 1814 and 1850, four commodities dominated India’s exports-
raw silk, opium, cotton and indigo.

(b)   Between 1814 and 1860, five commodities dominated India’s exports-
raw silk, opium, cotton, indigo and jute.

(c)   Indigo and raw silk required processing techniques.

(d)   Indigo and raw silk were financed by foreign capital.

26.    Which among the following will constitute Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI)"                                  [U*C 2016]

(a)   Buying a company in the target country

(b)   Expanding operations of an existing business in that country

(c)   Investing in the shares and stocks of companies in the capital market

(d)   Both (a) and (b)

27.    Which   of   the   areas   given   below   is/are   mainly   funded   by 
  the
International     Development     Agency     in     the     developing


countries"                    [U*C 2016]

I.       Infrastructure

II.      Education

III.     Environment friendly projects

IV.     Health care

Select the correct answer using the codes given below—

CodeV :

(a)   I, II and IV

(b)   I, II and III

(c)   I, II and IV

(d)   All of these

28.    When  two  or  more  countries  enter  into  an  agreement  to  eliminate
import quota and tariffs and promote trade among themselves, such a
group         of         countries         are         said         to         
form         a

—                                                          [U*C 2016]

(a)   Free Trade Area

(b)   Custom Union

(c)   A Common Market

(d)   Both (b) and (c)

29.    The entire capital of the ECGC is contributed by—

[%2M P2 2016]

(a)   Banks/FI/Corporates

(b)   Government of India

(c)   EXIM Bank

(d)   Insurance Companies

30.    Which  of  the  following  is  a  bond  through  which  Indian  entities 
 can
raise  money  from  foreign  markets  in  rupees,  and  not  in  foreign
currency"                   [%2M P2 2016]

(a)    Corporate Bonds

(b)   Masala Bonds

(c)    Municipal Bonds

(d)   Zero-coupon Bonds

31.    Globalisation does not include—           [U. PSC 2016]

(a)    Reduction in import duties

(b)   Abolition of import licensing

(c)    Free flow of Foreign Direct Investment


(d)   Disinvestment of Public Sector equit

ForHign ([FKangH SHrviFHs

32.      Which  of  the  following  authority  Sanctions  foreign  exchange  for
import of goods"             [UP PCS 2011]

(a)     Any National Bank

(b)     Exchange Bank

(c)     Reserve Bank of India

(d)     Ministry of Finance

33.      Who maintains the foreign exchange reserve in India"

[UP PCS 2012]

(a)     Reserve Bank of India

(b)     State Bank of India

(c)     Ministry of Finance Government of India

(d)     Export - Import Bank of India

34.      Which among the following is/are true for Real Effective Exchange
Rate of the currency of a country" [U*C 2016]

(a)    It is weighted average of the value of rate traded currencies

(b)     It is adjusted for inflation rate of prices

(c)     It is not adjusted for inflation of prices

(d)     Both (a) and (b) are true

35.      In the context of the Indian economy, which of the following options
correctly    describe    the    composition    of    the    foreign    exchange
resources"           [U*C 2016]

(a)     Foreign  currency  +  loans  from  the  World  Bank  +  SDRs  +  Gold
holdings of R.B.I.

(b)     Foreign Currency Assets + Gold holdings of R.B.I. + F.D.I.

(c)     SDRs + Gold holdings of the R.B.I. + Foreign Currency Assets

(d)     Remittances  of  NRIs  +  Exports  earnings  in  a  year  +  loans  
from  the
IMF

%alanFH oI TraGH & PaymHnt

36.    In  which  of  the  following  years,  was  the  trade  balance  
favourable  to
India"

(a)   1970-71 and 1974-75


(b)   1972-73 and 1976-77

(c)   1972-73 and 1975-76

(d)   1971-72 and 1976-77

37.    Why is there a need to always import cotton"

(a)   Obsolete machinery

(b)   Increasing demand

(c)   Shortage in the home market

(d)   Poor quality in the domestic market

38.    Consider the following statements :

1.     India has attained self-sufficiency in almost all consumer goods.

2.     In terms of capital goods, India still depends on the import.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

39.    Which one of the following items has gained the highest growth rate in
the import composition of the Indian Economy in the last decade "

(a)   pearls, precious and semiprecious stones

(b)   gold and silver

(c)   oil-cake and other solid residues

(d)   none of the above

40.    Which  of  the  following  does  not  form  part  of  current  account  
of
Balance of Payments"          [CDS 2014 ,,]

(a)   Export and import of goods

(b)   Export and import of services

(c)   Income receipts and payments

(d)   Capital receipts and payments

41.      Balance of Payment includes                [UP PCS 2008]

(a)     Visible Trade

(b)     Invisible Trade

(c)     Debts

(d)     All the above

SpHFial (FonomiF ZonHs & FDI


42.    The policy of Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in India was implemented
with effect from

(a)   Nov. 1998

(b)   Dec. 1999

(c)   Nov. 2000

(d)   Feb. 2002

43.    India’s  first  port-based  Special  Economic  Zone  named  International
Container Trans-shipment Terminal (ICTI) is being set-up at"

(a)   Kandla

(b)   Kochi

(c)   Goa

(d)   Tuticorin

44.    The SEZ Act 2005 which came into effect in February 2006 has certain
objectives" In this context consider the following :

1.     Development of infrastructure facilities

2.     Promotion of investment from foreign sources.

3.     Promotion of export of services only.
Which of the above is/are objective of this Act"

(a)   1 and 2

(b)   2 only

(c)   2 and 3

(d)   1, 2 and 3

45.    In  which  one  of  the  following  places  was  the  Asia’s  first  
Export
Processing Zone (EPZ) set-up"

(a)   Santa Cruz

(b)   Kandla

(c)   Cochin

(d)   Surat

46.    Which  of  the  following  sectors  of  the  Indian  Economy  is  
prohibited
from Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) "

(a)   Retail Trading

(b)   Lottery Business

(c)   Gambling and Betting

(d)   All of the above

47.    A great deal of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to India comes from
Mauritius comparing with many major and mature economies like UK


and France. Why"

(a)   India has preference for certain countries as regards receiving FDI.

(b)   India has double taxation avoidance agreement with Mauritius.

(c)   Most citizens of Mauritius have ethnic identity with India and so they
feel secure to invest in India

(d)   Impending dangers of global climatic change prompt Mauritius to make
huge investments in India.

48.    Both   Foreign   Direct   Investment   (FDI)   and   Foreign   
Institutional
Investor (FII) are related to investment in a country. Which one of the
following  statements  best  represents  an  important  difference  between
the two"

(a)   FII  helps  bring  better  management  skills  and  technology,  while  
FDI
only brings in capital.

(b)   FII  helps  in  increasing  capital  availability  in  general,  while  
FDI  only
targets specific sectors.

(c)   FDI  flows  only  into  the  secondary  market,  while  FII  targets  
primary
market.

(d)   FII is considered to be more stable than FDI.

49.    Areas  which  are  engines  for  economic  growth  supported  by  quality
infrastructure  and  complemented  by  an  attractive  fiscal  package  are
known as

[ND$/N$ SP 2016 ,]

(a)   Export Processing Zones

(b)   Duty Free Tariff Zones

(c)   Special Economic Zones

(d)   Technology Parks

50.    Which of the following is/are not FDI policy change(s) after 2010"

1.     Permission of 100 percent FDI in automotive sector.

2.     Permitting foreign airlines to make FDI up to 49 percent

3.     Permission  of  up  to  51  percent  FDI  under  the  government  
approval
route in multi-brand retailing, subject to specified conditions

4.     Amendment of policy on FDI in single-brand product retail trading for
aligning with global practices

Select        the        correct        answer        using        the        
code        given
below:                                                           [ND$/N$ SP 
2016 ,]

(a)   1 only


(b)   2 and 4 only

(c)   1 and 2 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3 only

51.    Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Act became effective in

(a)   2004

(b)   2005

(c)   2006

(d)   2007

[UP PCS 2010]


1.      (c)   In  an  economy,  the  sectors  are  classified  into  private  
and  public
on the basis of ownership.

PXEOic 2ZneUVhip - Majority or controlling share (51%) of a firm
by Government.

PUiYDWe  2ZneUVhip  -  Being  owned  by  a  private  individual  or
organization rather then by the state or public.

2.      (a)   Economic  liberalisation  in  India  started  with  substantial  
changes
in  industrial  licensing  policy.  The  LPG  Model  (Liberalisation,
Privatisation  &  Globalisation)  was  introduced  by  Dr  Manmohan
Singh      in 1991 as India was facing problems of depleting reserves.

3.      (b)   According to new CSR rules, companies must spend at least 2%
of  their  3  year  average  annual  profit  on  social  welfare  activites.
However, funds given to political parties and money spent on own
employees and their families will not countas CSR.

4.      (b)   Oil  sector  majors,  ONGC  Videsh  (OVL)  and  the  Oil  India-
IndianOil  (OIL-IOC)  combine  have  bagged  an  oil  block  each  in
Libya.  This  will  enhance  exploration  possibilities  for  the  Indian
companies in northern Africa.

2N*C   :    An    Indian    multinational    oil    &    Gas    Company
headquarters in Dehradun

%PCL   –   An   Indian   state   controlled   oil   and   Gas   Company
headquarters in Mumbai (Maharashtra)

5eOiDnce  PeWUoOeXP  –  Oil  Industry  Company,  Head  quarters–
Ahmedabad.

5.      (d)   With an aim to attract more visitors to the country by improving
cleanliness  and  hygiene  at  tourist  destinations,  Tourism  Minitry
launched  the  “Clean  India”  campaign  at  world  heritage  site  Taj
Mahal which has been adopted by ONGC. It is the second site to
be covered under this project. The first one was Qutub Minar.

6.      (b)   A   company   organized   for   commercial   purposes   is   
called   an
enterprise.  Classification  of  an  enterprise  into  public  or  private
sector is based on ownership of assets of the enterprise.

7.      (b)   Nominal,   authorized   or   registered   capital   means   the   
sum
mentioned in the capital clause of Memorandum of Association. It


is the maximum amount which the company raises by issuing the
shares and on which the registration fee is paid. This limit cannot
be exceeded unless the Memorandum of Association is altered.

8.      (c)   Disinvestment was not part of the model.

9.      (c)   An industrial unit is also regarded as potentially sick or weak 
unit
if at the end of any financial year, it has accumulated losses equal
to  or  exceeding  50  per  cent  of  its  average  net  worth  in  the
immediately preceding four financial years and has failed to repay
debts  to  its  creditor(s)  in  three  consecutive  quarters  on  demand
made in writing for such repayment.

The   Board   for   Industrial   and   Financial   Reconstruction   was
established   under   The   Sick   Industrial   Companies   (Special
Provisions) Act, 1985. The board was set up in January 1987 and
became functional as of 15 May 1987.

10.    (c)   Defensive Pricing is a pricing strategy where a product or service
is set at a very low price with the intension to drive competitors
out of market.

11.    (b)

12.    (d)   Trans Union CIBIL Ltd., founded in August 2000, in India’s first
Credit   Information   Company.   CIBIL   collects   and   maintains
records of an individual’s payments pertaining to loans and credit
cards.

13.    (d)   Hedge funds invest in a diverse range of markets and use a wide
variety  of  investment  styles  and  financial  instruments.  Hedge
funds  are  open  only  to  certain  types  of  investors  in  a  country
specified  by  the  regulator  and  cannot  be  offered  or  sold  to  the
general  public.  Legally,  hedge  funds  are  most  often  set  up  as
private investment partnerships that are open to a limited number
of investors and require a very large initial minimum investment.

14.    (b)   Inflation-indexed bonds are bonds where the principal is indexed
to inflation. They are thus designed to cut out the inflation risk of
an   investment.   These   bonds   thus   decrease   the   inflation   risk
attached  to  the  investment.  Moreover  these  bonds  are  a  better
hedge than FD in a volatile economy.

15.    (c)   The Gini coefficient is a measure of statistical dispersion 
intended
to  represent  the  income  distribution  of  a  nation’s  residents.  Gini


coefficient   commonly   used   as   a   measure   of   inequality   of
individual   income   or   wealth.   Lorenz   curve   helps   to   find
mathematical value of Gini coefficient.

16.    (b)   Besides  for  the  Wage  Boards  for  journalists  and  
non-journalists
newspaper  and  new-agency  employees  being  Statutory  Wage
Board, all other wage boards are non-statutory in application. That
is   why   recommendations   made   by   these   Boards   are   out   of
enforceable by the law.

17.    (b)   Unorganized  workers  (UW)  in  India  have  increased  many  folds
post   independence.   Around   52%   of   UW’s   are   engaged   in
agriculture & allied sector and they constitute more than 90% of
the labour work force.

Characteristics of unorganized sector are:

•      Excessive seasonality of employment

•      Poor working conditions

•      No fixed jobs

•      Work in very poor working environment

•      No job regulation

•      No security of Employment

•      Employed for a limited period

18.    (c)   The minimum period of maturity for Masala bonds up to an INR
equivalent of USD 50 million in a financial year will be 3 years,
and for above USD 50 Million (INR equivalent) will be 5 years.

19.    (c)   Masala bonds are bonds issued outside India but denominated in
Indian  Rupees,  rather  than  the  local  currency.  The  first  Masala
bond was issued by the World Bank backed International Finance
Corporation in November 2014 when it raised 1,000 crore bond to
fund infrastructure projects in India.

20.    (a)   The    major    aim    of    devaluation    is    to    encourage  
  exports.
Devaluation is a deliberate downward adjustment to the value of a
country’s   currency,   relative   to   another   currency,   group   of
currencies. One reason a country may devaluate its currency is to
combat trade imbalances.

21.    (a)   In a bid to expand its economic reach, India launched an initiative
in   2004   called   Techno-Economic   Approach   for   Africa–India
Movement  (TEAM–9),  together  with  eight  energy  and  resource-


rich   West   African   countries   viz.   Burkina   Faso,   Chad,   Cote
D’Ivoire,  Equatorial  Guinea,  Ghana,  Guinea  Bissau,  Mali,  and
Senegal. The initiative was part of a broader policy to engage the
underdeveloped,  yet  resource-wealthy  countries  of  West  Africa,
which   required   both   low-cost   technology   and   investment   to
develop their infrastructure. In particular, India increasingly wants
to  play  an  important  role  in  helping  Ivory  Coast  and  other  West
African countries channel their energy resources more efficiently.

22.    (a)   Foreign  currency  which  has  a  tendency  of  quick  migration  
is
called hot currency.

Soft  Currency  :  A  currency  with  a  value  that  fluctuates  as  a  result 
 of
country’s political or economic uncertainty.

DigiWDO *oOd CXUUency : It is a form of electronic money based
on mass unit of Gold.

ScDUce   CXUUency   :   A   currency   that   is   traded   in   a   foreign
exchange  market  and  for  which  demand  is  persistently  high
relative to its supply.

23.    (a)

24.    (d)   In the traditional accounting of balance of payments, the current
account equals the change in net foreign assets. A current account
deficit implies a paralleled reduction of the net foreign assets.

25.    (b)   During  the  period  of  1814  -  1860  AD.  mainly  five  
commodities
are  exported  from  British  India  such  as  -  cotton,  indigo,  jute
opium and raw silk.

26.    (d)   Foreign  direct  investments  can  be  made  through  the  opening 
 of
a subsidiary or associate company in a foreign country, acquiring
a controlling interest in an existing foreign company, or by means
of a merger or joint venture with a foreign company.

27.    (a)   The  areas  such  as  Infrastructure,  Education  and  Health  
care  are
mainly funded by International Development Agency in the poor
and developing countries.

28.    (a)   Free  trade,  usually  defined  as  the  absence  of  tariffs,  
quotas,  or
other  governmental  impediments  to  international  trade,  allows
each country to specialize in the goods it can produce cheaply and
efficiently relative to other countries.


29.    (b)   ECGC Ltd. (Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd.),
wholly owned by Government of India, was set up in 1957 with
the objective of promoting exports from the country by providing
Credit Risk Insurance and related services for exports.

30.    (b)   A  Rupee  Denominated  Bond  or  Masala  Bonds  are  the  bonds
issued  by  an  Indian  entity  in  foreign  markets  and  the  interest
payments    and    principal    reimbursements    are    denominated
(expressed) in rupees.

31.    (d)   The  main  Ingredients  of  Globalization  of  Indian  Economy  are
Privatization  of  the  public  sector,  Disbanding  of  Controls  and
Regulations     and     Deregulation     of     Trade     and     Finance.
Disinvestment   of   Public   Sector   equity   doesn’t   include   in
Globalization.

32.    (c)   Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  the  Sanctioning  Authority  for  
foreign
exchange for the import of goods.

33.    (a)   Manager of Foreign Exchange is one of the Function of RBI with
the objective to facilitate external trade and payment and promote
orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market
in India.

34.    (d)   The  Real  Effective  Exchange  Rate  is  the  weighted  average  
of  a
country’s  currency  relative  to  an  index  or  basket  of  other  major
currencies, adjusted for the effects of inflation.

35.    (c)   Foreign   exchange   resources   normally   include,   gold   
reserves,
special drawing rights (SDRs),  and International  Monetary  Fund
(IMF) reserve positions.

36.    (b)   A  favorable  balance  of  trade  is  known  as  a  trade  surplus 
 and
consist  of  exporting  more  than  is  imported.  It  is  favorable  in
1972-1973 & 1976-1977.

37.    (a)   India is amongst the top cotton manufactures in terms of quality.
One main reason to import cotton is obsolete machinery.

38.    (b)   In terms of capital goods, India still depends on the import has 
not
attained self sufficiency in almost all consumer goods.

39.    (b)   The items gold and silver have gained the highest growth rate in
the import composition of the Indian economy in the last decade.

40.    (d)   Capital receipts and payments do not form part of current account
of Balance of Payment.


41.    (d)   The  balance  of  payments  (BOP)  is  the  method  countries  use 
 to
monitor   all   international   monetary   transactions   at   a   specific
period.   BOP   includes   all   external   visible   and   non-visible
transactions, deficit or a surplus of a country.

42.    (c)   In Nov. 2000, the policy of Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in India
was  implemented  with  a  view  to  overcome  the  shortcomings
experienced   on   account   of   the   multiplicity   of   controls   and
clearances; absence of world-class infrastructure, and with a view
to   attract larger foreign investment in India.

43.    (b)   The    Kochi    International    Container    Transhipment    
Terminal
(ICTT), locally known as the Vallarpadam Terminal, is a container
trans-shipment facility which is part of the Cochin Port in Kochi,
India.

44.    (a)   The main objectives of the SEZ Act (2005) are:

a.     promotion of the export of goods and services

b.     generation of additional economic activity

c.     promotion of investment from foreign and domestic sources

d.     development of infrastructure facilities

e.     creation of employment opportunities

45.    (b)   India  was  one  of  the  first  countries  in  Asia  to  
recognize  the
effectiveness  of  the  Export  Processing  Zone  (EPZ)  model  in
promoting exports, with Asia’s first EPZ set up in Kandla in 1965.
This  was  done  to  overcome  the  shortcomings  of  the  multiplicity
of controls and clearances; absence of world-class infrastructure,
and  an  unstable  fiscal  regime  and  with  a  view  to  attract  larger
foreign investments in India.

46.    (d)   Retail  trading,  lottery  business  and  gambling  and  betting  
are  the
sectors of the Indian economy are prohibited from Foreign Direct
Investment (FDIs).

47.    (b)   The  double  taxation  avoidance  agreement  between  India  and
Mauritius has boosted investment in India to a great extent in the
last decade making Mauritius one of the key economic partners of
India.

48.    (b)   FDI  is  an  investment  that  a  parent  company  makes  in  a  
foreign
country. On the contrary, FII is an investment made by an investor
in   the markets of a foreign nation.


49.    (c)

50.    (a)

51.    (c)   The   Special   Economic   Zones   Act,   2005,   was   passed   by
Parliament in May, 2005 which received Presidential assent on the
23rd of June, 2005 and it came into effect on 10th February, 2006.
