Demand & Supply/Price/Revenue & Cost

1.      Devaluation usually causes the internal price to

(a)   Fall

(b)   Rise

(c)   Remain unchanged

(d)   None of these

2.      The supply-side economics lays greater emphasis on the point of view
of :

(a)   producer

(b)   global economy

(c)   consumer

(d)   middle-man

3.      The   price   at   which   the   Government   purchase   foodgrains   
for
maintaining  the  public  distribution  system  and  for  building  up  buffer
stocks are known as

(a)   Minimum support prices

(b)   Procurement prices

(c)   Issue prices

(d)   Coiling prices

4.      Which   one   of   the   following   agencies   of   Indian   Government
implements the price support scheme (PSS)"

(a)   FCI

(b)   NAFED

(c)   Agriculture pricing agency of India

(d)   None of the above

5.      Who recommends the MSP and issue prices"


(a)   Ministry of agriculture

(b)   Planning commission

(c)   Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices

(d)   NABARD

6.      The  base  of  Consumer  Price  Index  for  Industrial  Workers  is  
being
shifted from 1982 to—

(a)   1995

(b)   1998

(c)   2000

(d)   2001

7.      With reference to India, consider the following statements

1.     WPI is available on a monthly basis only.

2.     As  compare  to  Consumer  Price  Index  for  the  Industrial  Worker  
(CPI-
IW), the WPI gives less weightage to food articles.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   Only 1

(b)   Only 2

(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

8.      Which  of  the  following  would  cause  the  aggregate  demand  curve  
to
shift to the right"

(a)   an increase in purchases by the federal government

(b)   an increase in real interest rates

(c)   an appreciation of the American dollar

(d)   a decrease in the money supply

9.      Which   of   the   following   statements   is   true   about   
supply-side
economics"

(a)   The  main  change  made  by  the  tax  laws  of  1981  and  1986  was  to
increase marginal tax rates in order to balance the budget

(b)   The Laffer Curve says that, if marginal tax rates fall, tax revenues will
rise, and the budget deficit will decrease

(c)   If  the  tax  laws  of  1981  and  1986  had  had  their  intended  
effect,
consumption  would  have  risen,  causing  an  increase  in  both  real
GDP and in the price level

(d)   All of these

10.    Which of the following is not a ‘Public Good’"  [CDS 2016 ,]


(a)   Electricity

(b)   National Defence

(c)   Light House

(d)   Public Parks

11.    What is meant by price discrimination"               [CDS 2015 ,,]

(a)   Increase in price of a commodity over time

(b)   A  situation  where  the  same  product  is  sold  to  different  
consumers  for
different prices

(c)   Subsidization of a product by the Government to sell it at a lower price

(d)   General decrease in price of a commodity over time

12.    What is meant by ‘Public Good’"         [CDS 2015 ,,]

(a)   A commodity produced by the Government

(b)   A  commodity  whose  benefits  are  indivisibly  spread  among  the  
entire
community

(c)   A Government scheme that benefits the poor households

(d)   Any commodity that is very popular among general public

13.    In  view  of  the  fact  that  kerosene  is  an  inferior  good  in  
India,  what
is/are its implication(s)"

1.     As households get richer, they consume less kerosene.

2.     Over time there is a decline in quality of kerosene.

3.     Government needs to stop subsidies on kerosene.

Select        the        correct        answer        using        the        
code        given
below.                                                                       
[CDS 2015 ,,]

(a)   1 only

(b)   1 and 2 only

(c)   2 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

14.    Brent index is associated with               [CDS 2011 ,,]

(a)   crude oil prices

(b)   copper future prices

(c)   gold future prices

(d)   shipping rate index

15.    Which one among the following is a fixed cost to a manufacturing firm
in the short run"     [CDS 2013 ,]

(a)   Insurance on buildings

(b)   Overtime payment to worker


(c)   Cost of energy

(d)   Cost of raw materials

16.    The      income      elasticity      of      demand      for      
inferior      goods
is                                                                       [CDS 
2013 ,,]

(a)   less than one

(b)   less than zero

(c)   equal to one

(d)   greater than one

17.    The average fixed cost curve will always be


(a)   a rectangular hyperbola

(b)   a downward sloping convex to the origin curve

(c)   a downward sloping straight line

(d)   a U-shaped curve

18.    If the average total cost is declining then

(a)   the marginal cost must be less than the average total cost

(b)   total cost must be constant

[CDS 2013 ,,]

[CDS 2013 ,,]

(c)   the  average  fixed  cost  curve  must  be  above  the  average  variable 
 cost
curve

(d)   the marginal cost must be greater than the average total cost

19.    Which of the following statements is/are true"

[CDS 2014 ,,]

1.     If increase in demand and supply are of equal magnitude, the price will
remain unchanged, but the equilibrium quantity will increase.

2.     If increase in demand is of greater magnitude than increase in supply,
both equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity will increase.

3.     If increase in supply is of greater magnitude than increase in demand,
equilibrium price will fall but equilibrium quantity will increase.

Select the correct answer using the code given below :

(a)   1 only I

(b)   1 and 2 only

(c)   2 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

20.    Which of the following statements are correct"

[CDS 2014 ,,]


1.     When   marginal   revenue   is   positive,   total   revenue   increases 
  with
increase in output.

2.     When marginal revenue is zero, total revenue is maximum.

3.     When  marginal  revenue  becomes  negative,  total  revenue  falls  with
increase in output.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

(a)   1 and 2 only

(b)   2 and 3 only

(c)   1 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

21.    Demand for a commodity refers to        [CDS 2015 ,]

(a)   Desire for that commodity

(b)   Need for that commodity

(c)   Quantity demanded of that commodity

(d)   Quantity demanded at certain price during any particular period of time

22.    An exceptional demand curve is one that slopes

[CDS 2015 ,]

(a)   downward to the right

(b)   upward to the right

(c)   horizontally

(d)   upward to the left

23.    Rise in the price of a commodity means              [CDS 2015 ,]

(a)   rise in the value of currency only

(b)   fall in the value of currency only

(c)   rise in the value of commodity only

(d)   fall in the value of currency and rise in the value of commodity

Profit & Loss/Recession & Depression

24.    Who   among   the   following   has   suggested   migration   to   
accrual
accounting system from cash based accounting system in India"

(a)   I.V. Reddy

(b)   D.N. Ghosh

(c)   R.H. Patil

(d)   C. Rangarajan

25.    Consider the following actions by the Government:

1.     Cutting the tax rates.


2.     Increasing the government spending.

3.     Abolishing the subsidies.

In  the  context  of  economic  recession,  which  of  the  above  actions  can 
 be
considered a part of the ‘fiscal stimulus’ package"

(a)   1 and 2 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   1 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

26.    Which  one  of  the  following  terms  is  used  in  Economics  to  
denote  a
technique    for    avoiding    a    risk    by    making    a    counteracting
transaction"                     [CDS 2016 ,]

(a)   Dumping

(b)   Hedging

(c)   Discounting

(d)   Deflating

MarkHt, FaFtors oI ProGuFtion & InIlation

27.    Inflation is caused by

(a)   Increase in supply of goods

(b)   Increase in cash with the government

(c)   Decrease in money supply

(d)   Increase in money supply

28.    The process of curing inflation by reducing money supply is called

(a)   Cost-push inflation

(b)   Down–pull inflation/Demand pull inflation

(c)   Disinflation

(d)   Reflation

29.    The term stagflation refers to a situation where

(a)   growth has no relation with the change in price

(b)   rate of growth and prices both are decreasing

(c)   rate of growth is faster than the rate of price increase

(d)   rate of growth is slower than the rate of price increase

30.    During period of inflation, rates should

(a)   Increase

(b)   Decrease

(c)   Remain constant


(d)   Fluctuate

31.    In the paralance of economy / commerce, what is ‘Gilt-edged market’"

(a)   Gold and Silver market

(b)   Industrial securities market

(c)   Market of safe securities

(d)   Market of software technology products

32.    Inflation  in  India  is  measured  on  which  of  the  following  
indexes  /
indicators"

(a)   Cost of Living Index (CLI)

(b)   Consumer Price Index (CPI)

(c)   Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

(d)   Wholesale Price Index (WPI)

33.    When  the  prices  of  commodities,  goods  and  services  start  
declining
consistently, the phenomenon is known as

(a)   Discount field

(b)   Deflation

(c)   Negative growth

(d)   Market capitalism

34.    The  basis  of  determining  dearness  allowance  (D.A.)  to  government
employees in India is

(a)   National income

(b)   Consumer Price Index

(c)   Standard of living

(d)   Per capita income

35.    Economic growth is usually coupled with

(a)   Deflation

(b)   Inflation

(c)   Hyper inflation

(d)   Stagflation

36.    Consider the following statements in regard to money market in India:

(1)   It is a market for short-term funds with maturity ranging from overnight
to one year.

(2)   It acts as an instrument of liquidity adjustment for the Central Bank.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only


(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

37.    Which of the following can be the outcomes of very high inflation in
the economy"

(1)   Reduction in economic growth

(2)   Increase in savings

(3)   Reduction in exports

Select the correct answer using the codes below :

(a)   1 and 4 only

(b)   3 and 4 only

(c)   2 and 3

(d)   1 and 3 only

38.    In an economy a condition of lack of money supply in comparison to
the supply of the goods services, will lead to:

(a)   Inflation

(b)   Deflation

(c)   Hyperinflation

(d)   Devaluation

39.    Consider the following statements in regard to Headline inflation :

(1)   It provides an accurate picture of the inflation in the country.

(2)   It is affected by short term transitory effect on prices of products.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   1 only

(b)   2 only

(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

40.    Which of the following steps that will result in containing inflation"

(1)   Increasing Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)

(2)   Decreasing Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)

(3)   Permitting Central/State agencies to import duty free pulses and sugar.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:

(a)   1 only

(b)   1 and 3 only

(c)   2 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2 and 3

41.    In India, inflation is measured by the :


(a)   wholesale price Index Number

(b)   consumers price Index for urban non-manual workers

(c)   consumers price Index for agricultural

(d)   National Income Deflation

42.    Consider the following statements :

1.     Inflation benefits the debtors.

2.     Inflation benefits the bond-holders.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct"

(a)   2 only

(b)   1 only

(c)   Both 1 and 2

(d)   Neither 1 nor 2

43.    When economic development takes place

(a)   Specialisation increases

(b)   Commercialisation decreases

(c)   Market imperfections increase

(d)   None of the above

44.    Consider the following factors regarding an industry :

1.     Capital Investment

2.     Business Turnover

3.     Labour Force

4.     Power Consumption

Which of these determine the nature and size of the industry"

(a)   1, 3 and 4

(b)   1, 2 and 4

(c)   2, 3 and 4

(d)   2 and 3

45.    Disinvestment is :

(a)   Offloading of shares of private companies to government.

(b)   Off-loading of government shares to private companies.

(c)   Increase in investment.

(d)   Closing down of business concerns.

46.    Which one among the following is the total amount of money available
in an economy at a specific time "

(a)   Near money

(b)   Narrow money


(c)   Money volume

(d)   Money stock

47.    Which  one  of  the  following  causes  the  condition  in  which  prices
increase rapidly as a currency loses its value "

(a)   Stagflation

(b)   Conflation

(c)   Stealth inflation

(d)   Hyper inflation

48.    Which one of the following is the act of stimulating the economy by
increasing the money supply or by reducing taxes "

(a)   Disinflation

(b)   Reflation

(c)   Inertial inflation

(d)   Inflation hedge

49.    Gilt-edged market means

(a)   Market of government securities

(b)   Bullion market

(c)   Market dealing with metals

(d)   Market dealing with exports

50.    Which of the following is included in M1"

(a)   gold

(b)   checkable deposits

(c)   stock

(d)   credit cards

51.    Which  of  the  following  is  not  seen  as  an  advantage  of  the  
gold
standard"

(a)   For a given stock of gold, a rise in real money supply can only occur if
the price level declines.

(b)   Inflation is unlikely to emerge as a significant problem.

(c)   No  country  needs  to  serve  at  the  centre  of  this  fixed  exchange 
 rate
system.

(d)   The monetary mechanism has credibility.

52.    A rapid increase in the rate of inflation is sometimes attributed to the
base effect. What is base effect"

(a)   It is the impact of drastic deficiency in supply due to failure of crops.

(b)   It is the impact of the surge in demand due to rapid economic growth.


(c)   It is the impact of the price levels of previous year on the calculation 
of
inflation rate.

(d)   None of the statements given above is correct.

53.    A ‘closed economy’ is an economy in which

(a)   the money supply is fully controlled.

(b)   deficit financing takes place.

(c)   only exports take place.

(d)   neither exports nor imports take places.

54.    Many times we read a term “Free Market” in newspapers. What does it
mean"

1.     It is a market where pricing is driven by the laws of supply and demand.

2.     In free market things are available without restraints of the 
government.

3.     In  such  market,  goods  are  free  from  extraneous  influences  such  
as
buffer or quotas.

Codes :

(a)   only 1

(b)   only 2

(c)   only 3

(d)   Both 1 and 2

55.    Assertion (a) : Investment has a demand effect.

Reason   (R):   Investment   augments   the   productivity   and   income   in  
 the
economy.

CodeV:

(a)   Both (a) and (R) are correct, and (R) is the correct explanation of (a).

(b)   Both  (a)  and  (R)  are  correct,  but  (R)  is  not  the  correct  
explanation  of
(a).

(c)   (a) is correct, but (R) is incorrect.

(d)   (a) is incorrect, but (R) is correct.

56.    Which  of  the  following  statements  (s)  are  true  with  respect  to 
 the
concept of “efficiency” as used in mainstream economics"

1.     Efficiency  occurs  when  no  possible  re-organisation  of  production  
can
make anyone better off without making someone else worse off

2.     An   economy   is   clearly   inefficient   if   it   is   inside   the  
 Production
Possibility Frontier (PPF)

3.     At  a  minimum,  an  efficient  economy  is  on  its  Production  
Possibility
Frontier (PPF)


4.     The   terms   such   as   ‘   Pareto   Efficiency’,   ‘Pareto   
Optimality’   and
‘Allocative  Efficiency’  are  all  essentially  one  and  same  which
denote ‘efficiency in resource allocation’

Select        the        correct        answer        using        the        
code        given
below:                                                                       
[CDS 2015 ,,]

(a)   1 and 4 only

(b)   1 and 3 only

(c)   2 and 3 only

(d)   1, 2, 3 and 4

57.    The acronym SRO, being used in the capital market for various market
participants,          stands          for          which          one          
of          the
following"                                              [CDS 2008 ,,]

(a)   Self Regulatory Organisations

(b)   Small Revenue Operators

(c)   Securities Roll-back Operators

(d)   Securities Regulatory Organisations

58.    In a perfectly competitive economy production and consumption will
both   be   Pareto   optimal,   if   the   economy   operates   at   a   point
where                       [CDS 2013 ,,]

(a)   there is general equilibrium

(b)   output levels are below equilibrium

(c)   output levels are above equilibrium

(d)   consumption is less than output

59.    The       production       function       of       a       firm       
will       change
whenever                                                                   [CDS 
2013 ,,]

(a)   input price changes

(b)   the firm employs more of any input

(c)   the firm increases its level of output

(d)   the relevant technology changes

60.    Which   one   among   the   following   pairs   is   not   correctly   
matched
"                                               [CDS 2014 ,,]


(a)                 When total product
increases at an
increasing rate

:          Marginal
product
increases

(b)                 When total product            :          Marginal


increases at a
diminishing rate ,

(c)                 When total product
reaches its maximum

(d)                 When total product
begins to decline

product
declines

:          Marginal product
becomes zero

:          Marginal product
becomes positive

61.    The  way  total  output  changes  due  to  change  in  all  inputs  in  
same
proportion is known as law of      [CDS 2014 ,,]

(a)   Returns to scale

(b)   Diminishing returns

(c)   Increasing returns

(d)   Constant returns

62.    A  market  in  which  there  are  large  numbers  of  sellers  of  a  particular product,   but   each   seller   sells   somewhat   differentiated   but   close products is termed as

[CDS 2014 ,,]

(a)   Perfect competition

(b)   Monopoly

(c)   Monopolistic competition

(d)   Oligopoly


1.      (c)   Devaluation is a deliberate downward adjustment to the value of a
country’s   currency,   relative   to   another   currency,   group   of
currencies. Since it is relative to other currency so internal price
remains unchanged. It causes a country’s exports to become less
expensive and imports more expensive.

Devaluation is monetary policy tool used by countries that have a
fixed  exchange  rate  or  semi  fixed  exchange  rate.  It  is  often
confused with Depreciation and is the opposite of revaluation.

2.      (a)   Supply side economics lays greater emphasis on the point of view
of   the   producer   whereas   the   demand   side   economics   lays
emphasis on the interest of the consumer.

3.      (b)   The  price  at  which  the  Government  purchases  foodgrains  for
maintaining  the  public  distribution  system  and  for  building  up
buffer stocks are known as procurement prices.

Minimum  support  price:  It  is  a  form  of  market  Intervention  by
Govt. of India to insure agricultural producers against any sharp
fall in farm price. M.S.P. were announced by Govt of India.

Issue price : It is the price at which shares are offered to retail investors
in IPO issue.

4.      (b)   In  Order  to  help  the  farmers  in  getting  remunerative  
prices  for
their produce with a view to encourage higher investment and as
also to increase production and productivity of a commodity, the
government  declares  Minimum  Support  Price  (MSPs)  for  25
notified  agricultural  commodities  for  each  Kharif  &  Rabi  crop
season.  National  Agricultural  cooperative  Marketing  Federation
of  India  Ltd  (NAFED)  is  one  of  the  Central  Nodal  Agencies
which implements PSS.

5.      (c)   CACP was set up in 1985 and recommends for MSP, issue prices
as well as procurement prices.

6.      (d)   The base of CPI for industrial worker is being shifted from 1982
to 2001.

7.      (b)   This rise in wholesale food prices was not captured by WPI as the
weightage  for  food  articles  is  just  14.3%  compared  to  65%  for
manufactured  products  in  this  index.  On  the  other  hand,  the


weightage for food is 57% in CPI items which captures the impact
of  food  prices  better.  Further,  wholesale  prices  do  not  take  into
account the substantial margins at the retail level, which tend to
rise when there are shortages.

8.      (a)   An increase in purchase by the federal Gov. causes the aggregate
demand curve to shift to the right.

9.      (b)   The Laffer Curve says that, if marginal tax rates fall, tax 
revenues
will rise, and the budget deficit will decrease.

Supply  side  economics  is  a  macro  economic  theory  that  gives
economic growth can be most effectively created by investing in
capital and by lowering barriers on the production of goods and
services.

10.    (a)   Electricity is not public good but it is club good including roads,
bridges, gas, sewage, wires, telecom.

11.    (b)   When   different   consumers   pay   different   prices   for   
the   same
product, this situation is known as price discrimination.

12.    (b)   Public   good   means   a   commodity   or   service   which   is  
 given
without  profit  to  everyone  in  a  society  by  government  or  any
organisation.

13.    (a)   Generally  Kerosene  is  used  as  fuel  by  the  poor,  as  they  
get
prosperity, they use little of this fuel.

14.    (a)   Brent Crude is a major trading classification of sweet light crude
oil  that  serves  as  a  major  benchmark  price  for  purchases  of  oil
worldwide.  Brent  Crude  is  extracted  from  the  North  Sea  and
comprises   Brent   Blend,   Forties   Blend,   Oseberg   and   Ekofisk
crudes .The Brent Crude oil marker is also known as Brent Blend,
London  Brent  and  Brent  petroleum.  The  index  represents  the
average  price  of  trading  in  the  25  day  Brent  Blend,  Forties,
Oseberg, Ekofisk (BFOE) market in the relevant delivery month
as reported and confirmed by the industry media.

15.    (a)   In the short run insurance premium are fixed costs because they
are independent of the level of production.

16.    (b)   Inferior  goods  have  a  negative(less  than  0)  income  
elasticity  of
demand meaning that demand falls as income rises.

17.    (a)   Total  fixed  costs  are  constant,  so  the  average  fixed  cost 
 curve
diminishes with the output. Thus, the average fixed cost curve is a


rectangular hyperbola.

18.    (a)   When marginal cost is less than average cost, average cost must
be  falling.  When  marginal  cost  exceeds  average  cost  must  be
rising.  The  marginal  cost  and  average  cost  curves  are  related  to
each other.

19.    (d)

20.    (d)

21.    (d)   The demand for a commodity at a given price is the quantity that
will be purchased at a unit of time and at a unit price. Demand has
the  following  features;  Demand  refers  to  the  quantity  at  a  given
price, Demand must be defined per unit time.

22.    (b)   When the curve slopes downwards from left to right; higher prices
reduce the quantity demanded.

23.    (b)   When  the  price  level  rises,  each  unit  of  currency  buys  
fewer
goods and services.So rise in the price of a commodity means fall
in the value of currency only.

24.    (d)

25.    (a)   Fiscal   stimulus   -   Government   measures,   normally   
involving
increased public spending and lower taxation are aimed at giving
a positive jolt to economic activity.

26.    (b)   Hedging is used in limiting or offsetting probability of loss from
fluctuations in the prices of commodities, currencies or securities.

27.    (d)   Inflation  is  increased  in  the  prices  of  commodities.  It  
is  caused
due to decrease in supply and increase in demand of commodities.
So when money supply in the economy increases it means people
have more purchasing capacity and thus demand increases which
results in inflation .

Some factors affecting inflationary pressure.


28.    (c)   The  process  of  curing  inflation  by  reducing  money  supply  
is
called   disinflation.   Disinflation   is   a   decrease   in   the   rate   of
inflation – a slowdown in the rate of increase of the price level of
goods and services in GDP.

CoVW pXOO infODWion   It is caused by an increase in prices of inputs
like Labour, raw material etc. The increased price of the factors of
production leads to the decreased supply of Goods.

DePDnd  pXOO  infODWion     It  is  asserted  to  rise  when  Aggregate
demand  in  an  economy  outpaces  aggregate  supply.  It  involves
inflation rising as real GDP rises and unemployment falls.

29.    (d)   Stagflation occurs when the economy isn’t growing but prices are
increasing, which is not a good situation for a country to be in.
SWDgfODWion       Persistant   high   inflation   combined   with   high
unemployment and stagnant demand in a country’s economy.

30.    (a)   During inflation interest rates should increase so that the 
investor
invests more in lieu of higher interest earning thus money supply
reduce which can reduce inflation. Similarly higher interest rates
means  credit  becomes  costly  so  that  again  supply  of  money
reduces which helps in curbing inflation.

31.    (c)   In the parlance of economy, Gilt-edged market is called market of
safe    securities.    “Gilt-edged”    denotes    high-grade    securities,
consequently carrying low yields.


32.    (d)   Inflation  in  India  is  measured  on  the  Wholesale  Price  
Index
(WPI).   The   wholesale   price   index   (WPI)   is   based   on   the
wholesale    price    of    a    few    relevant    commodities    of    over
commodities available.

CoVW  of  LiYing  ,nde[     It  is  a  theoretical  price  index  that
measures relative cost of living over time or regions.

ConVXPeU  PUice  ,nde[     It  is  a  measure  that  examines  the
weightest  average  of  prices  of  a  basket  of  consumer  goods  &
services such as transportation food and medical care.

33.    (b)   When   the   prices   of   commodities,   goods   and   services   
start
declining  consistently,  the  phenomenon  is  known  as  deflation.
Deflation is because of fall in the aggregate level of demand. That
is,  there  is  a  fall  in  how  much  the  whole  economy  is  willing  to
buy and the price for goods.

NegDWiYe *UoZWh   It refers to a contraction in business sales or
earning.  It  is  also  used  to  refer  to  a  contraction  in  country’s
economy  as  evidenced  by  a  decrease  in  its  GDP  during  any
quarter of a given year.

MDUkeW   CDpiWDOiVP       An   economic   system   which   supports
private  enterprise  within  a  free  market,  the  means  of  production
being privately owned.

34.    (b)   The    basis    of    determining    dearness    allowance    
(D.A.)    to
government employees in India is consumer price index. Dearness
Allowance (DA) is an allowance paid to employees to compensate
them  for  erosion  of  real  income  /  wage  due  to  inflation.  The
increase  in  the  cost  of  living  and  the  consequent  erosion  of
income  is  measured  in  terms  of  a  consumer  price  index  number
and, DA to be sanctioned to employees is determined on the basis
of the percentage increase in that index.

DeDUneVV  $OOoZDnce     D.A.  is  calculated  as  a  percentage  of  an
Indian citizen’s basic salary to mitigate the impact of inflation on
people.

35.    (b)   With increase in GDP, aggregate demand increases, because more
production  means  people  have  more  disposable  income,  which
means   more   consumer   spending.   As   a   result,   prices   rise   in
response,  and  in  conclusion  because  aggregate  demand  grows


faster than long-term aggregate supply, economic growth will be
coupled with inflation.

+ypeU  infODWion     In  economic,  hyper  inflation  occurs  when  a
country  experience  very  high  and  usually  actuarially  rates  of
inflation. Economic growth is usually coupled with inflation.

36.    (c)   The money market consists of financial institutions and dealers in
money  or  credit  who  wish  to  either  borrow  or  lend.  Participants
borrow and lend for short periods of time, typically up to twelve
months. Money market trades in short-term financial instruments
commonly called “paper.”

37.    (d)   Inflation is a persistent increase in the general price level of 
goods
and  services  in  an  economy  over  a  period  of  time  .  When  the
general price level rises, each unit of currency buys fewer goods
and  services.  Consequently,  inflation  reflects  a  reduction  in  the
purchasing power per unit of money – a loss of real value .High
inflation means excessive supply of money and thus leads to rise
in     the  cost  of  credit  and  interest  rates.  Higher  inflation  leads  
to
reduction in economic growth, decrease in cost of credit, increase
in spending rather than saving as the value of money is declining.

38.    (b)   Deflation  may  be  caused  by  a  combination  of  the  supply  
and
demand   for   goods   and   the   supply   and   demand   for   money,
specifically  the  supply  of  money  going  down  and  the  supply  of
goods going up.

39.    (b)   Headline inflation also called as WPI inflation is a measure of the
total inflation within an economy and is affected by areas of the
market which may experience sudden inflationary spikes such as
food or energy. As a result, headline inflation may not present an
accurate picture of the current state of the economy as it doesn’t
take account of service sector.

40.    (b)   In  order  to  curb  inflation  if  CRR  is  increased,  then  it  
may  take
liquidity from markets as banks will have to deposit more money
with  RBI.  Moreover  inflation  may  also  be  curbed  by  Permitting
Central/State  agencies  to  import  duty  free  pulses  and  sugar.
However, Decreasing SLR will leave more money with banks to
give loans, which in turn will lead to inflation.


41.    (a)   In India, inflation is measured by the wholesale price Index . The
wholesale prices of commodities of base year are compared with
wholesale prices of current year to compute inflation.

42.    (b)   Inflation redistributes wealth from creditors to debtors i.e., 
lenders
suffer and borrowers benefit out of inflation. Bond holders = this
person has lend money (to debtors) and received bond in return.
So he  is  lender,  he  suffers,  by  the  way  they  haven’t  specifically
used the word – “inflation indexed bonds”, hence we cannot say
inflation benefits the bond-holders.

43.    (a)   When    economic    development    takes    place,    
specialisation
increases.       Economic       development       typically       involves
improvements in a variety of indicators such as literacy rates, life
expectancy  and  poverty  rates.  GDP  does  not  take  into  account
other aspects such as leisure time, environmental quality, freedom,
or  social  justice;  alternative  measures  of  economic  well-being
have been proposed.

44.    (a)   The  factors  which  are  responsible  for  an  industry  are  
capital
investment,   labour   force   and   power   consumption.   However,
nature and size of business is not determined by the turnover of
business.

45.    (b)   Disinvestment  is  a  process  in  which  off-loading  of  
government
shares  is  done  to  private  companies.  A  company  or  government
organization will divest an asset or subsidiary as a strategic move
for        the company, planning to put the proceeds from the divestiture
to better use that garners a higher return on investment.

46.    (d)   The   money   supply   or   money   stock,   is   the   total   
amount   of
monetary  assets  available  in  an  economy  at  a  specific  time.  It
includes currency in circulation and demand deposits.

NeDU  Poney  :  assess  which  can  readily  be  converted  into  cash,
such as bells of exchange.

NDUUoZ Poney : Money in forms that can be used as a medium
of  exchange  generally  notes,  coins  and  certain  balances  held  by
bank.

47.    (d)   Hyper inflation occurs when a country experiences very high and
usually accelerating rates of monetary and price inflation, causing
the population to minimize their holdings of money. Under such


conditions,  the  general  price  level  within  an  economy  increases
rapidly as the official currency quickly loses real value.

SWDgfODWion   :   Persistent   high   inflation   combined   with   high
unemployment.

ConfODWion  :  The  merging  of  two  or  more  sets  of  information
texts, ideas etc into one.

SWeDWh  infODWion  :  It  is  a  type  of  charges  or  fees  created  by
business to gain extra profit and revenue from its customers.

48.    (b)   Reflation is the act of stimulating the economy by increasing the
money supply or by reducing taxes, seeking to bring the economy
(specifically price level) back up to the long-term trend, following
a dip in the business cycle.

Disinflation : Reduction in the rate of inflation.

Inflation  Hedge  :  It  is  an  investment  with  intrinsic  value  such  as  
Oil,
Natural  Gas,  Gold,  farmland  and  to  a  lesser  degree  commercial
real state.

49.    (a)   The  gilt-edged  market  refers  to  the  market  for  Government  
and
semi-government securities, backed by the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI).   Government   securities   are   tradeable   debt   instruments
issued by the Government for meeting its financial requirements.
The term gilt-edged means ‘of the best quality’.

50.    (b)   M1 measures the most liquid components of the money supply, as
it  contains  cash  and  assets  that  can  quickly  be  converted  to
currency.

M0   +   M1   -   Narrow   money   -   includes   coins   and   notes   in
circulation and other money equivalents that are easily convertible
into cash.

M2 - M1 + short term deposits in banks.

M3 - M2 + long term deposits and money market fund.
M4 - M3 + other deposits.

51.    (a)   For  a  given  stock  of  gold,  a  rise  in  real  money  supply  
can  only
occur if the price level declines.

The blue fit of Gold standard is that a fixed assets back the money
values.  It  provide  a  self  regulating  and  stabilizing  effect  on  the
economy that discourages the inflation.


52.    (c)   The base effect relates to inflation in the corresponding period of
the   previous   year:   If   the   inflation   rate   was   too   low   in   
the
corresponding period of the previous year, even a smaller rise in
the price index will arithmetically give a high rate of inflation.

53.    (d)   This is an economy that does not interact with the economy of any
other  country.  A  closed  economy  prohibits  imports  and  exports
and  prohibits  any  other  country  from  participating  in  their  stock
market.

54.    (d)

55.    (a)   Investment  in  capital  and  labour  will  increase  productivity 
 and
production  which  will  cause  either  rise  in  wages  or  creation  of
employment or both thus the overall income will rise.

56.    (a)   When the re-organisation of production is not possible which can
make any one better off without making someone else worse off
then  efficiency  occurs.  Pareto  Efficiency,  Pareto  Optimality  and
Allocative Efficiency are all the same and indicates “efficiency in
resource allocation”.

57.    (a)   A   self-regulatory   organization   (SRO)   is   a   
non-governmental
organization  that  has  the  power  to  create  and  enforce  industry
regulations  and  standards.  The  priority  is  to  protect  investors
through   the   establishment   of   rules   that   promote   ethics   and
equality.

58.    (a)   General  equilibrium  involving  both  production  and  consumption
also   ensures   the   achievement   of   pareto   efficiency.   Pareto
efficiency    in    this    regard    requires    that    marginal    rate    of
transformation should be equal to the marginal rate of substitution
of             the individuals.

59.    (d)

60.    (d)

61.    (a)   The  way  total  output  changes  due  to  change  in  all  inputs 
 in  the
same proportion is known as “law of return to scale”.

62.    (c)   Monopolistic competition is a form of market in which there are
large  numbers  of  sellers  of  a  particular  products  but  each  seller
sells somewhat differentiated but close products.
